
	

By

KHAIRIA OMAR MOHAMED
INSTITUTE OF ACCOUNTANCY OF ARUSHA
DAR ES SALAAM CAMPUS
ACADEMIC YEAR 
2023/2024




   February 2024





CHAPTER ONE
INTRODUCTION
	Overview
This chapter represent the background of the study, statement of problem under study, research objectives, research questions, research hypothesis, significance of the study as well as scope of study.
	Background of the study 
The construction industry plays a main part in development and achieving the goals of society. Construction is one of the largest industries and contributes to about 10% of the gross national product (GNP) in industrialized countries and it is considered one of the industries on which national prosperity depends (Ejaz et al, 2013).
Global construction industry is reach an estimated $10.5 trillion by 2023, and it has grown for 4.2% from 2018 to 2023.The global future construction industry looks good with opportunities in residential, non-residential, and infrastructure. The major drivers for the growth of this market are increasing housing starts and rising infrastructure due to the increasing urbanization and the growing population, The emerging trends which have a direct impact on the dynamics of the construction industry include increasing demand for green construction to reduce carbon footprint, bridge lock up device systems to enhance the life of structures, building information systems for efficient building management, and the use of fiber-reinforced polymer composites for the rehabilitation of aged structures. 
The Construction work is potentially risky as compared to other sector jobs. It has uneven nature and it is necessary to recognize the impact of the key factors associated with risk on construction projects so that the timely alternatives or solutions could be taken to avoid them. There are various risks factors globally related with construction activities. These risks associated with clients, subcontractors, finance, contractors and government are common in nature (Ashly Babu 2014; Jayasudha and Vidivelli 2016).
Construction industry in India is unorganized and mostly dominated by people who are uneducated and ignorant of sustainable practices and are driven only by commercial viability, without considering other factors, such as quality, sustainability, health & safety and operability (OECD 2012; Sapuay 2016). First, the lack of awareness and insensitivity to sustainable development is a major problem in the sector and second the initial investment needed for green construction is high compared to conventional construction. The country is still seeing a large number of illegal construction activities where the developers can get away from penalties, ignoring the rules that will lead to a poor outcome (Pheng et al. 2016; Dal lasega and Rauch 2017; Singh et al. 2018). 
In recent years, most of the projects delivered in Africa have failed under the conventional project success criteria of being delivered on time, on budget, to the standard and quality required. These caused huge impact on the continent which constrained resource as it means loss of extra resources to initially implement the projects, the necessity to maintain infrastructure before their due period. Various reasons can be established for these, but the most prominent reason has to be the industry’s inability to embrace professionalism. As things stand, projects are incepted, planned, and executed outside the realms of professional project management principles and practices.  This is bound to result in inefficiencies and ineffectiveness
The African construction industry is changing. Construction projects on the continent are getting bigger and more complex. According to recent reports, this is owing to rapid urbanization, strong economic growth, a rising middle class, and regional integration in all of Africa’s nations. One of the most common concerns of construction industry experts cited is the escalating cost and delay of projects. This leads firms will likely struggle to maintain their margins in the coming year. When we saw Africa’s construction activities in both the numbers and total value of construction projects in regional ways East Africa leads the continent and Southern Africa, North Africa, West Africa, and Central Africa holds from 2nd to 5th ranks respectively (Edinger, 2019). 
The construction sector is a key element of national economies and provides critical support for social and economic development and it’s a very important service sector with extensive backward and forward linkages in every economy (Alagidede et al., 2016; UN.ECA, 2016). Currently, Africa’s construction industry is going through a boom, it has high contributed to the gross domestic product (GDP) of the nations. 
According to (Ford et al., 2020) it contributed about 7 % of Kenyan, 11.9% of Nigerian, 21.5% average of sub-Saharan Africa, 32.8% of Ethiopian, the continental leader, of their GDP over the last decade. Overall Africa is now investing in its infrastructure on average $108 billion per year (Bank, 2018). construction play a dual role in the economy which are as part of aggregate demand, determining output movements in the short run, and, by augmenting a nation's stock of productive assets, construction activities are central to the determination of long-run economic growth (Alagidede et al., 2016). 
In the last decade, Tanzania has experience relatively high economic growth averaging 6-7 percentage a year (World bank 2018). The construction sector in Tanzania played a key role in this growth, despite the deceleration of the economy in 2013, construction industry has since seen growth rates of those the general economy. 
Leeds (2016) sets out the four main challenges facing the construction sector, including poor productivity and productivity which is a result of easy entry and stiff competition, poor project performance, skilled labor shortage and sustainability concerns. These, along with the concerns that have traditionally impacted the sector on the continent, such as constantly rising project costs, corruption issues, lack of skilled labor, on-site safety, and capital supply constraints (Bonface 2015), study the factors that hinder the successful development of the construction sector by explain the structure of the construction sector and analyzed its main actors and the key drivers of development. The information presented was collected through interviews with relevant stakeholders, desk review, and publicly available information mainly from the Tanzania National Bureau of Statistics (NBS).
NBS (2018) attributes the country’s growth in the construction sector to an increase in construction activities, mostly the construction of commercial, residential buildings and ongoing infrastructure projects. These include the Standard Gauge Railway, expansion of Mwanza airport, construction of bridges at TAZARA and the Ubungo intersection in Dar es Salaam, construction of the Manyoni to Tabora road, the Songosongo natural gas project, which involved the construction of a 512-kilometre pipeline from Mtwara to Dar es Salaam, the Madimba Processing Centre, and the infrastructure for Phase 1 of the Dar es Salaam Rapid Transit Bus,  regardless of encouraging growth, there were number of constraints that hindered the performance of this sector. NBS among identified challenges are inadequate capacity of local contractors and consultants, inadequate and erratic work opportunities, inefficient procurement systems, occasional financial mismanagement in public/private sectors, poor working environments, low-technological equipment, lack of skills inadequate capital, unfavorable donor conditions and application of inappropriate delivery practices.
Furthermore, The Tanzania construction Market size is estimated at USD 5.62 billion in 2024, and is expected to reach USD 7.07 billion by 2029, growing at a CAGR of 4.67% during the forecast period (2024-2029). According to the Bank of Tanzania's (BoT) quarterly economic bulletin, commercial banks, lending to the private sector declined by 2.3% in March 2021, owing to the impact of the COVID-19 outbreak on the demand and supply of various products. Building and construction, trade, agriculture, manufacturing, mining, and quarrying were the economic activities that saw negative growth rates. Construction credit declined by 11.9%, while commerce and farm credit declined by 10.3% and 8.1%, respectively.
In recent years, Tanzania's heavy investment in building infrastructure has raised its indebtedness, as more infrastructure projects are being built around the country. Fiscal spending in 2021 was USD 15.7 billion, with donors covering only 8% of the total. From 2021 to 2023, the government anticipates the economy to grow at a rate of 6.3%. Tanzania was promoted from a low-income country to a lower-middle-income country in July 2020, with the government hoping to reach middle-income status in seven years. Tanzania's government is working to develop its infrastructure, energy, and agriculture sectors to grow its economy and expand export opportunities.
All these studies focused on factors affected performance of construction industry including delays and cost overrun but still nothing has been done on frequency of occurrence and severity impact, this study indent to assessing the factor affecting building construction agencies in Zanzibar case study at Zanzibar Social Security Fund(ZSSF).  



	Statement of the Problem
Zanzibar Social Security Fund was established under the Zanzibar Security Fund Act No. 2 of 1998, then Act amended by the Zanzibar Social Security Fund Act No. 9 of 2002 and re-enacted by the Act No. 2 of 2005. Prior to the enactment of the Act and establishment of the Zanzibar Social Security Fund. Before the inception of Zanzibar Social Security Fund, public service employees in Zanzibar were covered and received pension benefits under the Pensions Act No. 2 of 1990. The Zanzibar Social Security fund has three core functions to operate day to day activities which are collect the member contribution, payed the benefits and invest in any business.
The Section 5 (d) of the Zanzibar Social Security Fund Act Number 2 of 2005 prescribes one of the core functions of ZSSF as being, to invest the moneys collected in any possible ventures as Board may consider appropriate. In order to carry out this function, the Fund developed a comprehensive Investment Policy as the guideline for undertaking its various investments.
ZSSF as key player in the construction industry in Zanzibar. Up to 2020, ZSSF has been involved in 16 construction projects 12 in Unguja and 4 in sister Island Pemba while from 2020 onwards ZSSF has been involved in 4 other projects. Among the projects which has been undertaken by ZSSF are Kijangwani bus stand, Mbweni business area and play ground, Malindi car parking, Mombasa Market, Sheikh Thabit Kombo building, Michenzani Mall, Uhuru Amusement Park, Mapinduzi tower, Chawl Building Darajani, Mwanakwerekwe Shopping Centre, Mbweni real estate and Mkoani Hotel in Pemba. The performance issues observed in the ZSSF’s construction projects reflect the broader challenges in the construction industry in Zanzibar.
Despite the significant role that building construction agencies play in the development and infrastructure of Zanzibar, there have been observed challenges in their performance. These challenges have demonstrated in the form of project delays, cost and time overruns, and quality issues among others. The factors contributing to these performance issues are not well-understood or documented, leading to a gap in knowledge and lack of effective strategies for improvement. This research aims to assess the factors affecting the performance of building construction agencies in Zanzibar, with a specific focus on the Zanzibar Social Security Fund (ZSSF). The study will seek to identify, analyze, and understand these factors in order to propose actionable recommendations for improving the performance of these agencies. The findings of this research could provide appreciated understandings for policy makers, construction agencies, and other stakeholders in the construction industry in Zanzibar.
	Research Objective
	General Objective
To assess the factors affecting performance building construction agencies in Zanzibar social security Fund(ZSSF).
	Specific Objectives
Specific objectives of study are: -
	To examining the status of building construction of Zanzibar a case study ZSSF.
	To assess the challenges facing building construction project of Zanzibar a case study ZSSF.
	To suggest appropriate ways of improving performance building constructions agencies.

	Research Question
 The study will be guide by the following questions: -
	What are the status of building construction in Zanzibar?
	What are challenges facing building construction project of Zanzibar?
	What are suggest appropriate ways to improving performance building constructions agencies?
	Research Hypothesis
H01: There is no significant change in the status of building construction in Zanzibar over a specified period.
H02: There are no significant challenges facing building construction projects in Zanzibar.
	Significance of the Study
The study aimed to providing the highlight on the factors affecting performance of buildings construction agencies in Zanzibar. The study will contribute to the body of knowledge by providing adequate information on constructions industry. Once the significant factors of affecting performance of building constructions are identified. The construction agencies will be able to increasing their energies and resources to the specific factors, thereby to increasing the performance of the building industries where the benefit from such improvement will include increasing attractiveness in construction investments Zanzibar, increasing construction industry productivity, improve employment prospects and future welfare of Zanzibar construction workers.
Also, the research study has great benefit to Zanzibar Social Security Fund(ZSSF) and other Social Security Funds in issues of building investments, since it may provide information on factors affecting the performance of building construction agencies so the organization can use as reference in organizations decision. The findings of this study will also be used by other construction investment companies and agents, as they will help them be aware on factors affecting performance in building constructions activities.
The study will provide awareness to the Government and understanding how government can intervene the building construction industry in formulating appropriate policies and regulation.
The study will fulfil researcher’s academics need of acquiring Master Degree of Project planning. Furthermore, the research will identify the gaps available for further studies. Similarly, the finding of the study will be useful to practitioner academic and other stakeholders in different organizations as an important reference material.
	Scope of the Study 
The geographical focal point of study is Zanzibar under the case study of Zanzibar Social Security Fund(ZSSF). The selected area has two Head Offices, located at Unguja and Pemba Island and two regional offices at Kitongani and Kinduni Unguja, in archiving the study objective all Head Offices and Regional Offices will be reached. The researcher chose the said area because of its geographical management and accessibility to the area something of which eased the data collection. Also the study area selected due to the richness of reliable data relating to the topic.





CHAPTER TWO
LITERATURE REVIEW
2.0 Overview
This chapter represents the literature reviewed related on the context of assessing the factors affecting performance buildings construction agencies, it consists the key terms and concepts of constructions industry, theoretical review concerning performance of building construction, empirical literature review which explain the other study related to this study, research gap as well as conceptual frame work which show the theoretical relationship between the study indicators variables.
2.1 Definition of Key terms and Concepts
2.1.1 Quality performance
The quality defined as conformance to established requirements being the characteristics of the product, process and services specified by contracts. It consists the delivery of results that are fit for agreed upon purpose of the project, the fulfillment of a customer’s demand and expectations must be transformed into precisely specified and quantifiable requirements for building construction project. The focus of quality based performance measurements is on factors like the quantity of defects created and cost of quality (Henry MA 2007).
2.1.2 Cost performance
Cost is very important considerations throughout the building construction life cycle and can be motivating force behind the success of the construction projects. the cost performance analysis it determines and mitigate the risk of each building project (Frimpong Y 2003). The accuracy of the cost estimates allows clients to validate the funds needed to carry out the project and make them available as needed emphasized that efficient management is important for creating productive and cost effective site.



2.1.3 Time performance
The time is another major to measuring success of building construction projects, occurrence of timeouts in the construction activities has negative impact on development of construction plan, time overrun resulted many negative effects, including proceedings between the owner and the contractor, increasing cost, lost productivity and revenue or termination of contracts (Kaliba C, Muya.M at el 2009).
2.2 Theoretical Literature Review
2.2.1 Theory of Constraints
The theory of Constraints was established by Eliyahu M. Goldratt in his publication titled The Goal, in 1984. It is basically geared to help organizations consistently and continually achieve their intended objectives. In 1997, It states that management systems are limited in attaining their goals by a limited number of constraints. This theory assumes that organizations can be measured and controlled by variations in output, operational expenses and inventory. Building construction program are achieved by use of limited resources hence same principles are employed so that the resources are used in such a way that there is maximum utilization of the same in the most cost effective manner. This increases the delivery of building construction project within stipulated time, cost and good quality. Also theory of constraints views constraints from a positive perspective. Instead of viewing constraints as inhibitors to achievement of set objectives, It assumed to determine the performance of a system while regularly improving the system’s performance. TOC as a management theory provides a unique scientific management approach. As brought out by the theory, complex human based systems can be simplified while keeping the essential issues under managerial control. In construction projects, Theory of constraints provides a unique outlook to evaluate how variables like project management, procurement & finance, consultants, project manager, contractor, client and environment affects successful delivery of these projects.
2.2.2 The Systems theory.
The term system theory initiates from Bertallanfy (1993). It states that organizations are social systems. Real systems are open to and interact with their environments. The different parts/elements within and around the organization interact to affect the way organization operate and therefore strategy implementation. It can be argued from a system ‘s approach to strategic management that many of the reasons for strategies failure may be attributed to the successive dominance of different reductionism approaches to strategic management. Such partial approaches to project management ignore the complex, embedded and dynamic nature of today ‘s organization (Kalman, 2009). The system theory approach in project implementation helps managers of organizations to understand the customer, forecast environmental reaction, estimate resource competence as well as coordinate strategic project activities, obtain management commitment, estimate time requirements, ability to follow the plan, manage the strategic change and ensure effective communication
2.2.3 Performance Measurement Theory 
Mbugua et al., (1999) have recognized a distinction between performance indicators, performance measures and performance measurement. According to Mbugua et al., performance indicators identify the measurable evidence necessary to prove that a planned effort has achieved the desired result. In other words, when indicators can be measured with some degree of precision and without ambiguity, they are called measures. However, when it is not possible to obtain a precise measurement, it is usual to refer to performance indicators. Performance measures are the numerical or quantitative indicators (Sinclair and Zairi, (1995). On the other hand, performance measurement is a systematic way of evaluating the inputs and outputs in manufacturing operations or construction activity and acts as a tool for continuous improvements (Sinclair and Zairi, 1995; Mbugua et al., 1999). The many performance measurements have emerged in management literature. Some examples include: the financial measures (Kangari et al., 1992), client satisfaction measures (Walker, 1984), employee measures (Abdel-Razek, 1997), project performance measures (Belassi et al., 1996) and industry measures (Egan, 1998). The classification of performance measurement based on the method of measurement and area of measurement (Rene cordero,1990). The methods of measurement of performance can be in terms of the technical performance, the commercial performance and the overall performance. The areas of measurement including the planning & design level, the marketing level and manufacturing level and overall performance are at the level of a firm or strategic business unit.


2.3 Empirical Literature Review
Khotso D, Clinton A et al (2018) investigated the factors influencing the performance of the construction industry in South Africa. The study used the primary data obtained through the 50 questionnaire survey which was distributed to professionals in the construction industry. The study revealed significant factors affecting the performance of the construction industry are Instability of construction material prices, project cost overruns, backlogs of payment to contractors, material and equipment and inefficient funding of construction projects. The study provided the body of knowledge in relation to what influences the performance of the construction industry. It is evident that economic growth, regulatory bodies, skills and training programs influences the performance of the construction industry in South Africa. Therefore, an increase in infrastructure investment and firm regulatory implemented in the south Africa can accelerate the economic growth and improve the performance of the construction industry. 
Arowolo T. A, Kolawole O. et al (2019) studied on the factors Affecting Quality Control in Building Construction- Nigeria. The study focused on the factors that hinder the adherence to quality control in construction projects and the perceptions of stakeholders on quality control. Data were collected through a structured questionnaire distributed to 30 construction companies and 116 stakeholders through focus group discussions were also held with relevant authorities. It was observed that; 30.17% of the respondents believed that greedy contractors are the main factor responsible for non-adherence to quality, 12.07% have the opinion that inadequate regulatory framework is the most important factor. To other (23.28%), quackery is the hindrance to quality, 19.83% opined that insufficient quality control laboratories/personnel is the main cause, while 14.66% believed that inadequate budgetary allocation is responsible for non-adherence to quality. The researcher suggested that, reprimanding building designers, contractors and approving agencies for defects in building projects and violation of building regulations will go a long way in reducing this risk. Also, appropriate Agencies/Institutions should withdraw the licenses of erring professionals, there should be strict site supervision and enforcement of quality control measures by relevant agencies especially in the states.
Oladigbolu E, Okwori J, at al (2022) Assessed the Factors affecting the Tendering Process in construction Management. A case Study of Lagos State, Nigeria. The research aimed to identify and analyze problems in the stages of the tendering process and offer potential solutions to resolve or curb these problems. The Semi-structured questionnaires comprising of fifty-five (55) questions were categorized into six (6) groups which are project characteristics, business benefits, capabilities, bidding situation, client related factors and external environment related factors. The study results indicated that a level of agreement among the contractor’s tendering success factors, also the expansion of organization expertise, tendering capabilities, flexibility for changes and variations, number of competitors, project difficulties, design constructability, project methodology, tender document detailing, client reputation, involvement of other parties and political consideration to be the top factors affecting the tendering process. However, there is a broader understanding of the top factors affecting the tendering process among the stakeholders within Lagos state. Furthermore, the study recommended that reasonably sufficient time should be given to examine project characteristic in order for the contractors to assess their suitability for every construction project they intend to tender for, construction design approach, bidding process and project methodology should be correctly outlined to all the stakeholders by the client to eliminate ambiguity in the tendering process and subsequently, project delivery.
Bitamba & S.H. (2019) investigated the factors affecting the performance of construction projects in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.  Study indicated that, the Congolese construction industry faces many difficulties in dealing with the different factors that affect the proper performance of the construction process. The study intended to identify and evaluate the most significant key performance indicators that affect construction projects in the Congo, and to classify them using the relative importance index (RII). The study revealed that, most important factors affecting Congolese construction projects were design, client management, contractor productivity, scheduling and the contract. Also the experience and skill of the design team were found to affect the design-related factors and delayed payments and delivery of the construction site to the contractor were found to be the most important factors affecting client/owner-related factors. Based on the study the client and management factors shared an equal average significant value of 0.68, while the productivity scheduling and contract related factors for the contractor shared an equal average value of 0.67. Finally, study recommended to the Congolese construction industry to ensure proper project performance and successful projects.
Gosa kene (2021), Identified the factors affecting construction project performance in JIMMA University, Ethopia. The study tried to identify the main factors affecting the performance of construction projects in the institutions. A questionnaire survey was conducted which are classified in to 7 clusters, 90 Questionnaires were disseminated to contractors. Then results were analyzed using relative importance index and multiple linear regression analysis to determine owners and contractors’ awareness toward the performance influencing factors in construction projects and to see independent variables effect on dependent variable (construction project performance). The study found that independent variables showed significant relation with the dependent variable and the independent variables describe 41.3% of variance of the dependent variable performance of construction projects in Jimma University. Likewise, contractor related factors and labor and material related factors are the most influential that delay the project success in the JIMMA University construction project performance with average of Relative Importance Index (RII) equals 0.723 and 0.722 respectively. Project characteristics relate factors are the least influential factors in the JIMMA university construction project performance with average of Relative Importance Index (RII) equals 0.582.  The study concluded that the Contractors should have enhanced further for skilled workers who are accessible in all sides at both office and position that will solve associated problems on appropriate construction management, quality of work, cost control and time management. Also there should be government and projects owners who are selecting a competent contractor for a job that is serious for the successful delivery of a construction project and to solve the problems of the acceleration of material prices and improper quality of materials in construction projects.
Gebremedhin Sebsibe (2019) conducted a research to assessed the actors affecting the Performance of Construction Projects in defense construction enterprise-Ethopia. The main objective of the study was to assessed the influence of resource management related factors, stakeholder management related factors, procurement management related factors, and quality management related factors on project performance in Defense Construction Enterprise as a case study. The researcher used primary data to collected information through a structured questionnaire where 89 questionnaires were distributed to purposively selected employee of defense construction enterprise, The  study found that major resource management related factors that affect the performance of the projects are cash flow and financial difficulties, price escalation of construction material in the market, material wastage on projects, breakdown and failure of construction equipment in the enterprise, changes in material types and specifications during construction, and unavailability of construction material in the market. The major procurement management related factors that affect the performance of the projects are lack of an effective and efficient Procurement planning, procurement control mechanism, and contract management in the enterprise. the major stakeholder management related factors that affect the performance of the project are lack of stakeholder attribute assessment, lack of Stakeholders involvement in decision making process, lack of stakeholder identification, and lack of stakeholder communication and engagement. Among quality management related factor that affect the performance of projects, lack of quality management system and lack of management commitment and leadership towards quality were the two most important factors that affect the performance of projects.  Also the regression model result reveals resource, stakeholder, and procurement related factors are positively and significantly influence the project cost performance but quality management related factors were found positive but not significant factor influencing the cost performance of project. Also, regression model result reveals resource and stakeholder management factors are positively and significantly influence the project time performance but quality and procurement management related factors were found positive but not significant factor influencing the time performance of project. On other hand, resource, stakeholder, and quality related factors are positively and significantly influence the project quality performance but procurement management related factors was found positive but not significant factor influencing the quality performance of project. The results of the study may suggest that the enterprise need to give more emphasis on resource and stakeholder management to enhance project performance.
Evelyn Karwith (2017), evaluated the factors influencing quality of construction project in building construction project in Meru Town Nairobi Kenya. The study adopted the descriptive survey research   involved the 255 top management of construction agencies, contractors, country inspectorate, national governments officials and project owner in Meru Town. The study determined the influence stakeholder involvement on the quality of building projects in the Meru Town, it found that greatly influence quality of building construction projects. Also the study evaluating the extent to which project funding influence quality of building construction and revealed that, there are positively and significance influences quality of building construction. Furthermore, the study concluded that project funding, availability of construction material and stakeholder involvement has significance influence on improving the quality of building construction in Meru Town. Finally, the researcher recommended that inculcation of a culture of collaboration participation, characterized by the use of the appropriate contract forms to ensure att stakeholders are familiar with their mandate and importance to the project as well as working with and seeking advice from risk management experts on practices such as risk pooling to protect stakeholders.
Gwahula Raphael (2016), Assessed the critical factors affecting quality performance of government financed construction projects in Tanzania. The study was originated as much of government financed construction projects are effected with variations on delivering time, cost and quality. The study identified factors if not considered can lead to poor quality performance of projects. Closed end questionnaire consisted of 20 performance factors were distributed to 80 respondents from construction related activities. The study findings show that the critical factors that have direct impact on quality performance of government financed construction projects are; project financing processes, experience of contractors in construction industry, project technology, availability of plant and equipment, procurement system and processes as well as the project manager knowledge and skills. Furthermore, the multiple regression model established showed   that there is positive linear relationship between project quality performance and the critical quality performance factors and all the critical quality performance factors had positive coefficients with an acceptable level of significance. The researcher recommended further studies should be taken on the economic and social factors that hinder women participation in construction relation activities and how training and learning opportunities for continuous improvement will have positive impact on the performance of construction projects
Jenifa Simon (2017) studied the factors causing delays in Road construction projects in Tanzania: a case of TANROAD Dar es salaam City. The study was intended to finding the causes of delay in road construction projects in Tanzania. A questionnaire was sent to the TANROADS Officials, Contractors, Consulting Firm and other Stakeholders. Study found that overall of 54.3% out of 45 respondents see that the study variables contribute to the road construction projects delay confirm that are the real contributor of the road construction delay in Tanzania.  The Politicians are the leading variable with 68.9% to the road constructions delay. The findings also show that involvement of other parties and environmental conditions had below average a percentage, which is 44.4% and 42.2% respectively and finally  recommended that the government and TANROADS should have long term plan for road construction policy, employ skilled and experienced contract in project management, to have proper design in road project execution, to have adequate communication between parties, to use good quality and enough materials and correct equipment, use of proper organizational structures.
Daud Fadhil (2019), examined factors influencing real estate investment decisions in social security funds at Zanzibar social security fund (ZSSF). The study used quarterly secondary data from July 2010 to June 2018  and used unit root test, co-integration, vector error correction model and Granger causality test  to  estimate the linear econometric model equation in which four internal factors namely member contribution, benefit payment, return on investment , investment in government securities and three external factors urbanization , inflation rate and interest rate The study results showed that there was presence of long-run relationship at equilibrium between real estate investment decisions in ZSSF. Also the member’s contributions, return on investment, investment in government securities and urbanization had positive significant long run relationship with real estate investment decisions in ZSSF. Furthermore, the study shows that benefit payment, inflation rate and interest rate had a negative relationship with real estate investment decisions at ZSSF. The researcher then recommended that management of Zanzibar social security fund (ZSSF) has to consider these factors when they make real estate investment decisions including continuing the share of investment in Government security since it is the only investment opportunity which has low risk and resulted expected and stable return in increases real estate investment.
Abdulkarim. R (2020) studied the assessment on the impact of delaying road construction Projects in Zanzibar, case study of Urban West Region Unguja-Zanzibar. The study was intended to assess the impact of the delay road construction project in Zanzibar. The objectives of study were to identified the factors that contribute to the delay in road construction project in Zanzibar and assessed the social and economic impact of delays in roads construction project. The 60 respondents were selected from the Ministry of construction officials and local peoples and collected data by using focus group discussion, interview and questionnaires. The study results show that the financial problems was a major factor for the delay of road construction project, followed by low supervision, corruption, low technology and poor tendering. Also the environmental problems, low business activities and diseases were resulted from the delay road construction project. The researcher concludes that good financial management, proper planning and knowledge and skills were the appropriate measures to reduce the problem of the delay road construction project. Furthermore, the study recommend that the policies should be integrated and representative and there needed on integrating non-governmental organizations and individual stakeholders of the road construction project in all steps during formulating, implementing and evaluation of the road construction project improvements in Zanzibar for bring together all the road construction project stakeholders and create sense of total contribution and recognition on the duty of improving the road construction project and duty of the government.
2.4 Research gap
With the help of literature reviews, it showed that there are different researches that were done on, factors affecting the constructions industry. Most of these researches done in assessing the factors affecting performance of quality in building construction (Gwalink Rapheal (2016), Evely Karwith (2017)). Other study has taken consideration on assessing the factors affecting delays of building construction projects especial Government project such as road (Abdul Karim (2020), Jenifa (2017)). Also there are few research that focused on measure constructions performance in tendering and procurement process. To fill this gap this study will specifically focus on the assess the factors affecting performance building construction agencies in Zanzibar used ZSSF as case study. The study will group the existing factors affecting performance of building construction as characteristics related factors, labor and material related factors, contractual relationships, external environment, contractors related factors these categories form the basis by which research model developed to measure their effect on building construction performance in term of time, cost and qualities.
2.5 Conceptual Frame work
The study will be governing by the two important variables Dependent variable (Outcome variable) which is Performance of Building construction agencies, this performance will be measured by concerning the costs, time and qualities performance of building construction. Similarly, the independent variable which are factors affecting performance building construction agencies, this factors will include characteristics, labor and material, contractual, external environment and contractors related factors.

Figure 01: The study conceptual framework used to show various variable that affect the performance of building construction agencies.
INDEPENDT VARIABLES
Factors affecting performance of building
Construction agencies.


								        DEPENDENT VARIABLE

										





Source: Own constructed (2024)







CHAPTER THREE
RESEARCH METHODOLOGY
3.0 Overview
This chapter outlines the methodology used in the research study. It describes the research design that will use in this study, area of study, target population, sample size and sampling procedure, Research approaches, description of tools used in collecting the data, the measurement of variables and the techniques used in analyzing the collected data reliability of data collection instruments, data analysis techniques and ethical considerations.
3.1 Study Area
The research will conduct at Zanzibar Social Security Fund(ZSSF), aimed to assess the factors affecting the performance of building construction agencies. ZSSF has two main offices in Unguja and Pemba Islands, and regional offices at Kitongani and Kinduni Zanzibar.
The study area is selected because there is detail information concerning the study objectives, since ZSSF has many building construction projects which implemented in last five years including Kijangwani bus stand, Mbweni busness area and play ground, Malindi car parking, Mombasa Vegetable Market, Sheikh Thabit Kombo building, Michenzani mall, Uhuru amusement park, Mapinduzi tower, Chaul Building Darajani, Mwanakwerekwe Shoping Building and Mkoani Pemba Hotel which will help a researcher to obtain the currently and reliable data from the sample drawn in these study area.
	Research Design
This study engaged a case study design so as to obtain comprehensive data and in depth information, the case study aims to understand the case in-depth, and its natural setting, recognizing its complexity and its context (Adam and Kamuzola, 2008). Hence, a case study will use to get the information on factors affecting the performance of building construction agencies in Zanzibar. A case study design will be adopting because it is a fairly comprehensive method, which enables a researcher to study deeply and thoroughly different aspects of the phenomenon and it is flexible in respect to data collection methods (Kothari, 2009). Also the study will use a cross-sectional design whereby, Kothari, (2004) argues that a cross-sectional survey method targets to collect data from a relatively large number of cases at a particular time.
	Research Approaches
The study will adopt the quantitative approach which involves the collection of data so that information can be quantified and subjected to statistical treatment in order to support or contradict the hypothesis or alternate knowledge claims. Creswell (2002) declares that quantitative research initiated in the physical sciences. The researcher uses mathematical models as the approach of data analysis, also involves data collection that is typically numeric and the researcher tends to use mathematical models as the methodology of data analysis. This approach will adopt to minimizes biases in data collection and improves the success and cost-efficiency of the data collection procedures.
	Targeted Population
The population of study will comprise the employees from Zanzibar Social Security fund (ZSSF), with respect to the nature of the topic and the activities of the organization, the assessing will be focus on every employee of the Zanzibar Social Security Fund(ZSSF) and other building construction agencies workers who involving in ZSSF construction projects. The population will comprise the Mangers/senior staff, Internal and external auditors, Accountants, Clients, Contractors, Consultants, Procurement Officers and other organization staffs.
3.2.3 Sampling Procedures
Kothari, (2006) defined sample as a collection of some parts of the population on the basis of which judgment is made. The random probability sampling will use to get a sample from a large population and the technique will more appropriate because not only provided respondents equal chance of being selected but also guarantee better representation of the varying population compared to non – probability sampling, it is also less subjective as the selection does not rely solely on human judgment hence keep the overall process free from biasness.
In this study all respondents will give an equal chance of being selected basing on their willingness to participate in the study, position, education, work experience, adequate knowledge, professional back ground and awareness of the building construction performance. 

3.2.3.1 Sample Size
The sample size is known as a number of individuals selected from a population to constitute the sample. It involving the process of taking the number of observations or replicates to include in a statistical sample. It is an important feature of any empirical study in which the goal is to make inferences about a population from a sample. In practice, the sample size used in a study is determined based on the expenses of data collection, and the need to have sufficient statistical power (Kothari 2004)
In this study the Yamane (1967) provided formula used to calculate the sample size as following

                                 n=N/(1+N(e)^2 )
Where n is the sample size
N is the population size
e is level of precision
Given the population of 130 and 95% level of significance (5% or 0.05 level of precision), the sample size is assuming to be 98 respondents which equal of 75% of population.

	Data Collection
Data collection is any process of preparing and collecting data to obtain information to keep on record, to make decisions about important issues, or to pass information on to others Weller, (1988). The study will use both primary and secondary data collection techniques to collect data from the respondents and other sources.
3.2.4.1 Primary Data
The primary data are those, which are collected afresh and for the first hand information from the field and thus happen to be original in character. In this study, primary data will collect from respondents through questionnaires. Questionnaires will specifically design to answer research questions and attain research objectives.


3.2.4.2 Secondary Data 
The Secondary data are those which have already been collected by someone else and which have already been passed through statistical process. Secondary data for this study will collected from books, journals, articles and reports both published and unpublished, as well as from online sources.
3.2.4.3 Questionnaire
The Questionnaire is a set of questions, which are usually distribute to the selected respondents to answer at their own appropriate time and return the filled questionnaire to the researcher. The reason for using questionnaire includes its ability to cover a large sample size at a low cost and give a respondent adequate time to give well thought out answers (Lewis & Thornhill, 2012). In this study the questionnaire will divided into 2 sections. First section will seek to obtain the personal information of the respondents and second section contains the questions of the subject matter concerning to assess the factors affecting the performance of building construction agencies 
	Data quality control
The data quality control is critical aspect of any research study. It ensures the accuracy, reliability and validity of the data collected which in turn impacts the credibility of the research findings without appropriate data quality control research findings may be skewed, misleading or entirely incorrect. This study will take in consideration the reliability and validity test to maintain the consistency and valuable of data collected.
3.2.5.1 Reliability 
Reliability estimates the consistency of the measurements or more simply, the degree of uniformity of the results obtained from repeated measurements. For this purpose, the quality of data was measured, evaluated and guaranteed using appropriate techniques. The data quality will be assured and measured through internal validity instrument in to correct research instruments application for accurately measuring the variables during the data collection processes. In addition, data consistency will be checked using reliability test by Cronbach’s Alpha methods. According to Sekaran (2010), reliability less than 0.6 are considered to be poor, those in the 0.7 range, acceptable, and those above 0.8 are good, as reliability coefficient is closer to 1.0, the research data is more consistency.
3.2.5.2 Validity 
The validity refers as the degree to which the sample of the test item represent the content that is designed to measure. Creswell (2003) notes that validity is considering if one can draw significant and valuable inference from scores on the instrument. The research will adopt content validity which refers to the extent to which a measuring instrument provides adequate coverage of the topic under study. To ensure content validity, the instruments will review to enabling the content to address the purpose and avoided ambiguity. This will ensure that all respondents understand the content on the questionnaire.
3.2.6 Measurement of Variable
In order to able to select the appropriate method of analysis, the level of measurement must be understood in which for each measurement there are /is an appropriate method that can be applied and not others. In this study, ordinal scale will use. 
Ordinal scale is involving the ranking or a rating data, it is normally uses integers in ascending and descending order. Hence, the questionnaires will be structured based close- ended questions, the respondents will be asked to express their opinions by indicate their level of agreement on a five-point Likert scale with the following ratings Strongly agree, Agree, Neutral, Disagree and Strongly Disagree.
3.3 Data Analysis
The data analysis will involve the component part of descriptive statistics such as Mean and Standard Deviation while analyzing and ranking the different factors that affects the building construction performance. Also.  the study will use graphs, tables and other components which are also vital to analyze the collected data. Furthermore, the relationship between the dependent variable, building construction performance and the independent variables such as factors affecting performance building construction agencies, this factors will include characteristics, labor and material, contractual, external environment and contractors related factors will express as a linear combination of the independent variables plus an error term. The information from respondents will analyzing by Statistical package for social science (SPSS) version 22, where testing hypothesis through association by cross tabulation and descriptive statistics will be explained.
The Multiple Linear Regression Model will be used to examine the statistical relation between dependent and independent variable, where the following regression formula will be applied. 
 Y = β0 + β1X1 + β2X2 + β3X3 + β4X4+ β5X5 +…………. + βnXn + Ɛ
BCP= β0 + β1CMRF+ β2LMRF + β3CRF + β4ERF+ β5CoRF + ε
Where based on this study, the dependent variable (Outcome variable) is Y which is the Building construction performance (BCP) which depends on independent variables which are:-
X1-Characteristic material related factors(CMRF)
X2-Labor and material related factors(LMRF)
X3-Contractual related factors(CRF)
X4- External related factors(ERF) 
X5- Contractor related factors (CoRF)
ε is the error term which involve all factors that may affect the outcome but not included in the mode.
β0 is the intercept that gives the mean average effect on Y when all variable has no effect on the model. Thus, (β1, β2………….. β5) represent the average change in Y per unit change each respectively variable. The significant of the variables will be tested p-value which will be generated from the SPSS model summary output.
3.4 Ethical Consideration
The Ethics is one of the main considerations in research, this study will be subjected to the following ethical considerations. The study work will be starting after receiving the authorize permit from relevant organization. All involved respondents will clearly communicate about the objective of the research before they are asked to give their answer and opinions.  Also during the study, the research will avoid to commit any activities that results to the physical or psychological damage to the respondents because of the research purpose, for making research more confidential the respondents will not ask about their name, race, religion, etc.
3.5 Limitation of the Study
During implementation of this study the various limitation may face the researcher which can affect the accomplishment of the study on time including respondent’s unwillingness to give the relevance information, unlikely responses, time wasting and harassment from organization leader, time delay on receiving questionnaire from respondents and permit for data collection from relevance institution. In addressing with this limitations, the researcher will make sure request data collection permit letter and authorization from the relevant institutions on time to preventing delay of that permit, getting respondent’s consents by introduce the main objectives of study to them before data collection, guaranteed the respondents on confidentiality of collected information which will use for the research purpose and not otherwise.

















Budget and Work Plan
   Research Budget
S/No	ITEMS	COST IN TZ
1	Stationery	250,000/=
2	Equipment	200,000/=
3	Travel	350,000/=
4	Research assistance	300,000/=
5	Service (Photocopy, Printing, Binding)	350,000/=
6	Dissemination	450’000/=
	TOTAL COSTS	1,550,000/=

 Research Work Plan.
S/NO	ACTION	MONTHS
		FEB
2024	MAR
2024	APR
2024	MAY
2024	JUN
2024	JUL
2024	AUG
2024	SEPT
2024   
1	Proposal Writing 								
2	Questionnaire preparation 								
3	Data collection permission								
4	Data collection								
5	Data entry								
6	Data analyzing and Report writing 								
7	Dissemination and final submission								








References
Abdulkarim R, Makame (2020), The assessment on the impact of delaying road construction Projects in Zanzibar: a case study of Urban West Region Unguja-Zanzibar.
Adam, J and Kamuzora, F. (2008), Research Methods of Business and social studies, Morogoro: Mzumbe Book Project
Alagidede, P., & Mensah, J.  O. (2016). Construction, institutions, and economic growth in sub-Saharan Africa. 
Arowolo T. A , Kolawole O.A, Adewale A.K, Adeyemi O.M (2019) Factors Affecting Quality Control in Building Construction- Nigeria.
Bonface, D. (2015). ‘Top 5 Challenges Facing Africa’s Construction Sector’. Available at: Available at: https://constructionreviewonline.com/2015/07/top-5-challenges facing-africas-construction industry.
Bitamba & S. H.(2019) factors affecting the performance of construction projects in the democratic republic of the Congo.
Bank, A.  D.  (2018).  African Economic Outlook.  In Annual yearly review study.  DOI: 10.1373/clinchem.2007.09378.
Daud Fadhil (2019), Factors influencing real estate investment decisions in Social Security Funds: a case of Zanzibar Social Security fund.
Don Elger, 2010, Theory of Performance, University of Idaho ,also available at www.webpages.uidaho.edu
Creswell, J. W. (2003). Research Design: Qualitative, Quantitative, and Mixed Methods Approaches. Thousand Oaks: Sage Publications, Inc.
Gwahula Raphael (2016). An Assessment of Critical Factors Affecting Quality Performance of Government Financed Construction Projects: Evidence from Tanzania 
Gebremedhin Sebsibe (2019) Factors affecting the Performance of Construction Projects: The case of defense construction enterprise-Ethopia
Gosa kene (2021), Factors affecting construction project performance in JIMMA University, Ethopia
Evelyn Karwith (2017), Factors influencing quality of construction project: A case study building construction project in Meru Town -Nairobi Kenya.
Ejaz, N., Hussain, J., Shabbir, F., Shamim, M.A., Naeem, U.A., Tahir, M.F., Ahmad, N. and Frooq, Q.U. (2013), Assessment of Most Critical Success Factors for Mega Construction Projects in Pakistan, Life Science Journal, Vol.10 No. 10s, pp.255-26
Jenifa Simon (2017) The factors causing delays in Road construction projects in Tanzania: a case of TANROAD Dar es salaam City
Kothari, C. R. (2004). Research Methodology, Methods and Techniques (2nded). New Delhi: New Age International (P) Ltd.   
Kothari, C. R. (2009). Research Methodology, Methods and Techniques (2nded). New Delhi: New Age International (P) Ltd.   
Khotso D, Clinton A et al (2018) Factors Influencing the Performance of the South African Construction Industry: A Case of Limpopo Province
Leeds, R. (2016). ‘Top 4 Challenges Facing the Construction Sector’. Digitalist Magazine. Available at: http://www.digitalistmag.com/future-of-work/2016/08/15/ top-4-challenges-facing-construction-sector.
Mbugua, L., Harris, P., Holt, G., & Olomolaiye, P. (1999). A framework for determining critical success factors influencing construction business performance. Paper presented at the Proceedings of the Association of Researchers in Construction Management 15th Annual Conference.
NBS (Tanzania National Bureau of Statistics) (2018). ‘Gross Domestic Product 2017’. Available at: www.nbs.go.tz (accessed 20 July 2018).
Ofori G. (1984) Challenge of construction industries in developing countries.Department of building, National University of Singapore 10. Imbert, I.D.C. (1990). Ogunsemi, D. R. (2006). Predicting the Final Cost of Construction in Nigeria. The Quantity Surveyor, PP. 36.
Oladigbolu E, Okwori J, at al (2022) Assessment of Factors Affecting the Tendering Process In construction Management. A Case Study of Lagos State, Nigeria
Rene Cordero, 1990, The measurement of innovation performance in the firm: An overview Research Policy, 1990, vol. 19, issue 2, 185-192
Sapuay, S. E. (2016). Construction waste – Potentials and constraints. Procedia Environmental Sciences, 35, pp. 714-722. 
Singh, S., Dixit, S., & Varshney, D. (2018). Sustainable construction management in education sector. International Journal of Engineering & Technology, 7(2), pp. 300-304. 
Sekaran, U., & Bougie, R. (2010). Research methods for business: A skill building approach (5th edition) New Jersey: John Wiley and Sons.


